<a id="introduction"></a>

Preface
=======

*Why these tutorials?*

The R2 platform (<http://r2platform.com> / <http://r2.amc.nl>) is a
genomics analysis and visualization platform that tries to provide a
biologist friendly interface to high throughput data. It has been
developed within the department of Oncogenomics at the AMC in the
Netherlands, where it still serves as a primary entry point for all
types of high throughput data generated within the department. The R2
platform consists of 2 parts; a (publicly accessible) database, that
stores the data, coupled to a web-interface that provides a set of tools
and visualizations to mine the database.


Even though many people like the concept of R2, getting started with the
platform as a new user can be a bit difficult or intimidating. With this
tutorial book, we hope to get new users started and at the same time
demonstrate the diverse set of functionalities to users which may
already have experience with R2, but want to get familiar with new
additions to the platform.


The setup of these tutorials is as follows: We have divided the different
aspects of the R2 platform in a number of chapters which reflect tasks
that are often performed within R2. In each chapter, step by step
instructions guide you through an analysis, which you can perform online
within R2 yourself. During these steps, also features related to the
respective chapter, such as additional analyses or visualizations will
be introduced, thereby conveying the ease of using the interconnected R2
interface. Chapters 1-6 demonstrate a great number of core
functionalities, which you will encounter often and from different
angles when working within the platform. The next set of chapters (7-14)
dive more into specialized functions, that some of you may be interested
in. Chapter 15 demonstrates how users can adapt R2 to their needs by
explaining how you can generate your own grouping variables or store
personal lists of genes. This chapter also explains how you can start
your own user group and share information with specific other users for
collaborative work. The last two chapters further elaborate on this by
explaining how to add your own data and how to export data from R2 for
use in other tools.


We hope that these tutorials will be helpful. If you have any comments
or suggestions you're welcome to contact us through the [R2
website](http://r2.amc.nl).
